The prostate is a glandular organ of the male reproductive system that helps to
control urinary and reproductive functions.  According to the charity Prostate
Cancer UK, one in eight British men will  be diagnosed with prostate
adenocarcinoma (prostate cancer, henceforth 'PC') in their  lifetime {citation}.
Men over 50 years of age are often subjected to routine digital examinations, or
urine test (the 'PCA' test) for signs of PC.  However the gold standard
diagnosis is the Gleason test.  In brief, a series of small needle sized
biopsies are taken from the patient's prostate gland.  Each biopsy is processed
and scored by a pathologist for signs of abnormal cell type and
structure.  Gleason scores ranging from 2 to 5 are considered not
malignant, whereas scores ranging from 6-10 are considered malignant and provide
an added estimation of severity (Humphrey, 2004).

Contrary to some types of cancer, malignancies that remain local within the
prostate are rarely lethal (survival rating of ~99%) {citation}.  However, if a
malignancy born of the prostate undergoes metastasis (the process of cancer cell
migration to other sites in the body), the survival rate drops to ~28%.  Because
of this discrepancy, many men opt for radical prostatectomy (surgical removal of the
entire prostate).  While ensuring prevention of metastasis, removal of the
prostate results in high morbidity, e.g. inability to control urination, loss of
sexual function, etc.

Unfortunately, there are currently no prognostic tests for PC metastasis.  The
patient data  that is typically available at the time of diagnosis is not rich
enough to accurately predict the likelihood of prostate cancer metastasis
{citation}.   A model that is able to predict whether an untreated malignancy
would be likely to remain locally within the prostate or to metastasize could be
an invaluable tool on whether prostatectomy (and the associated morbidity) is
necessary.  To generate such a model, a more distinguishing set of feature data
is required.

One potential solution to this problem is an RNA-seq profile.  In brief, RNA-seq
is a technique that reads and counts RNA sequences in a sample.  When a gene is
activated in a cell, the DNA sequence is read ('transcribed') into an RNA
sequence.  Thus by reading all of the RNA molecules that exist in a sample, one
may determine which genes have been activated, and to what degree.  A gene count
profile is the estimation of activation for the full set of known human genes.

Metastatic cancer cells behave much differently than those that remain local,
thus there must be an inherent difference in gene activation.  That said, there
are  likely to be many different genetic paths towards metastasis, so it is
unlikely that a single gene could distinguish metastasis state.   
